Project Gutenberg's Bird Houses Boys Can Build, by Albert F. Siepert

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Bird Houses Boys Can Build

Author: Albert F. Siepert

Release Date: July 7, 2008 [EBook #25990]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD HOUSES BOYS CAN BUILD ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net










BIRD HOUSES
BOYS CAN BUILD

BY

ALBERT F. SIEPERT, B.S.

Professor of Manual Arts, Bradley Polytechnic Institute
Editor, Shop Problems Series (on tracing paper)
Editor, Shop Notes and Problems Department of
MANUAL TRAINING MAGAZINE

[Illustration]

THE MANUAL ARTS PRESS
PEORIA, ILLINOIS




_Copyright 1916_
The Manual Arts Press

Fourth Edition, 1919




FOREWORD.


Years ago a country boy heard or read that if a simple box having a
hole of a certain size were set upon a post in March or early April it
would not be long before bluebirds would be around to see if the place
would do as a summer cottage. So he took an old paint keg such as
white lead is sold in, nailed a cover across the top, cut an opening
in the side and then placed it on a post ten or twelve feet high. Only
a day or two passed before a soft call-note was heard, a flash of
blue, and the songster had arrived. His mate came a few days later and
the paint keg with its tenants became the center of interest in my
life. A second brood was reared in midsummer and when the cool days of
September came a fine flock left for the South. Each year the house
was occupied until the post decayed and the paint keg fell down, but
in memory the sad call-note is still heard when spring comes, for it
is house hunting time once more, and the bluebirds are looking for the
home they had known.

That boys elsewhere may know the joy of the companionship of birds,
this little book is written. Birds will come and live near the houses
of men whenever food and water are to be had, safety from enemies is
given, and when homes are built for them to replace the shelters
nature offered before men came with their cultivated fields and
crowded cities. The following pages give pictures and drawings of
houses that boys have built and in which birds have lived. These
houses are planned for the species of birds that have become
accustomed to civilization so that they will inhabit the houses put up
for them.

The author is indebted to Professor Chas. A. Bennett of Bradley
Institute and Mr. L. L. Simpson of The Manual Arts Press for helpful
suggestions and encouragement; to John Friese for making the drawings;
and to the following for the use of the originals of the illustrations
which tell most of the story.

     Edward G. Anderson, Seattle, Wash. Figs. 32, 33, 34, 36, 39,
     54, 55, 56, 57.

     Frank H. Ball, Pittsburgh, Pa. Figs. 12, 29, 45, 66, 67.

     Leon H. Baxter, St. Johnsbury, Vt. Figs. 21, 22.

     F. D. Crawshaw, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wis. Figs.
     11, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44.

     Donald V. Ferguson, St. Paul, Minn. Figs. 9, 28, 38, 62.

     Geo. G. Grimm, Baltimore, Md. Fig. 14.

     C. M. Hunt, Milton, Mass. Figs. 46, 52.

     H. A. Hutchins, Cleveland, O. Figs. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

     Elmer Knutson, St. Cloud, Minn. Figs. 30, 31.

     National Association of Audubon Societies, 1974 Broadway,
     New York City. Figs. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

     Chas. Tesch, Milwaukee, Wis. Fig. 64.

     The Crescent Co., Toms River, N. J. Figs. 35, 49, 50.

     United States Department of Agriculture Bulletins; Figs. 20,
     51, 65.

     Youths Companion, Perry Mason Co., Boston, Mass. Figs. 58,
     59, 60, 61.

                              ALBERT F. SIEPERT.

     Peoria, Ill., March, 1916.




CONTENTS


                                                       PAGE.

Birds That Live in Nesting Boxes                         7

    Bluebird--robin--chickadee--wren--house
    finch--woodpecker--flicker--martin

Construction of Bird Houses                             15

    Dimensions of nesting boxes--houses of sawed
    lumber--rustic houses--cement and stucco houses

Placing Houses                                          36

Feeding Shelves and Shelters                            37

    Foods

Bird Baths                                              48

Bird Enemies                                            51

    Men--ants and vermin--English or house
    sparrow--sparrow traps

Bird House Exhibitions                                  54

Bibliography                                            57

    Bird and bird house literature

Index                                                   59




BIRDS THAT LIVE IN NESTING BOXES.


Certain varieties of birds will nest in homes built for them if these
houses are of the right shape and dimensions. Other birds may be just
as desirable but do not build nests and rear their young in boy-made
nesting boxes. We are therefore mainly concerned with the first group
which select cavities in trees for their homes if nothing better is to
be found.

[Illustration: FIG. 1. BLUE BIRDS, ADULTS AND YOUNG BIRD.]


BLUEBIRD.

This bird may be found during the summer months in most of the states
east of the Rocky Mountains, Figs. 1 and 59. It spends its winter in
the southern states and southward, returning north in March and April.
The principal items of food are grasshoppers, caterpillars and
beetles. It should have a house measuring about 5" in length and
width, inside measurements, and 8" or more in depth. The entrance hole
should be 1-1/2" in diameter and placed near the top, so that the
young birds cannot get out until strong enough to have some chance of
escape from their enemies after they leave the nest. While authorities
differ as to the need of cleaning after a season's use, it seems wise
to provide the house with some device whereby the bottom may be
removed for such purposes. Houses for this species are shown in Figs.
11, 21, 22 and 24.

[Illustration: FIG. 2. (ROBIN)]


ROBIN.

Robins usually announce the coming of spring when they return to their
breeding grounds in the northern states, where they are general
favorites. Figs. 2 and 60. The nest is usually built of mud and lined
with grasses; placed in the fork of a tree or on some sheltered ledge.
Robins take kindly to nesting shelves put up for them and it is well
to put up several since but one brood is reared in each nest built.
This old nest should be removed after the young birds have gone. A
simple shelf is shown in the lower left hand corner of the photograph,
Fig. 24, as well as in Figs. 20 and 49.

[Illustration: FIG. 3. (CHICKADEES)]


CHICKADEE.

The chickadee is one of the brave little spirits who spends the entire
winter with us, Fig. 3. We can be of considerable service to him
during the cold weather by providing food shelters. During the summer
months his home is usually found in some decaying stump, hence
nesting boxes of the rustic type placed in some remote spot of the
orchard or park are most attractive to him.


WREN.

When all other song birds fail to take advantage of a house built for
them, the wren may still be counted on. Almost any sort of home from a
tin can or hollow gourd on up is satisfactory if put in a safe place
and provided with an opening 1" or slightly less in diameter, so the
sparrows must stay out, Figs. 4 and 5. Good homes are shown in Figs.
10, 14, 15, 16 and others.

[Illustration: FIG. 4. WREN AND RUSTIC HOUSE.]


HOUSE FINCH.

The house finch has made many enemies because of its fondness for
cultivated fruits and berries. However, it has some redeeming
features in its song and beauty. The nest is usually placed in the
fork of a limb--evergreens being favorite nesting places. The house
shown in Fig. 51 is suitable for these birds but is also acceptable to
wrens.

[Illustration: FIG. 5. WRENS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 6. FLICKER.]


WOODPECKER.

The favorite of this interesting family is the little downy, Fig. 7.
Living largely upon harmful grubs and insects, this bird does an
immense amount of good by protecting our forests from insect scourges.
Woodpeckers do not build nests as most birds do, but excavate a deep
cavity in some dead tree leaving a quantity of chips at the bottom on
which the eggs are laid. Nesting boxes should be of the rustic type
made as shown in Fig. 12, leaving some sawdust mixed with a little
earth in the cavity. These houses should be placed on trees in a park
or orchard. Boys should be able to tell the difference between the
woodpeckers beneficial to man and the sapsucker whose misdeeds often
cause considerable damage to fruit trees. A nuthatch is also seen in
Fig. 7 enjoying a meal of sunflower seed.

[Illustration: FIG. 7. DOWNY WOODPECKER (ABOVE) NUTHATCH (BELOW).]


FLICKER.

The flickers spend much of their time on the ground in search of ants
which form the larger percentage of their food. Since ants sometimes
cause considerable trouble for other birds, a pair of flickers are
worth cultivating for the sake of the work they can do. Artificial
nesting boxes of sufficient depth and size are quite readily used,
Figs. 6, 20 and 25.


MARTIN.

Nearly everyone knows swallows of one variety or another. The most
beautiful of the family are the martins, Fig. 8. This bird is of great
service against the inroads of wasps, bugs and beetles. It prefers to
live in colonies even though the males fight bitterly at times. Martin
houses should have at least several rooms, each separate from all the
others. Houses have been built to accommodate fifty and more families.
Smaller ones are shown in Figs. 8, 9, 13 and 45.

[Illustration: FIG. 8. A MARTIN COLONY.]

[Illustration: FIG. 9. THE PEER GYNT COTTAGE FOR MARTINS.]

Fig. 9 is a miniature reproduction of Peer Gynt's cottage for a martin
house. This house was not only an attractive thing to make, but
martins selected it for their home during the past summer.




CONSTRUCTION OF BIRD HOUSES.


Bird houses may be divided into three main classes: (1) those made of
sawed lumber to specified dimensions; (2) the rustic type made of (a)
slabs of wood with the bark left on, or (b) pieces of tree trunk, or
(c) of sawed lumber trimmed with bark or twigs; and (3) cement or
stucco houses. In each case the entrance should slant slightly upward
to keep the rain out.

[Illustration: FIG. 10. WREN HOUSES.]

Almost any sort of lumber may be used, but birds take most readily to
that which has been weathered out of doors. A kind should be used
which does not warp or check badly; white pine and cypress meet these
requirements and are worked with ease. Yellow poplar is used and cedar
with or without the bark left on has its friends for houses of the
first or second classes.

Nesting boxes of sawed lumber should be painted on the outside to
improve their appearance and to preserve them against the effect of
the weather. It is often wise to leave a small amount of unpainted
surface around the entrance, and all paint should be thoroughly dry
before houses are expected to be occupied. Colors selected will depend
somewhat upon the neighborhood, but white, grey, dull greens or browns
are often used.


DIMENSIONS OF NESTING BOXES.

The following table, copied from Farmers Bulletin, No. 609, U. S.
Dept. of Agriculture, gives in small space valuable information about
dimensions that experience and investigation have indicated as good
for particular varieties of birds. This list includes many varieties
that do not commonly live in houses built for them, however. As time
goes on, we may expect to find more of these birds living in our
nesting boxes because they are apt to seek the same sort of home as
the one in which they were reared. The table is given to be of service
to those wishing to plan new houses not shown here.

_Dimensions of nesting boxes for various species of birds._

=================+==========+==========+==========+==========+=========
                 |   Floor  |   Depth  | Entrance | Diameter |  Height
    Species.     |    of    |    of    |  above   |    of    |  above
                 |  cavity. |  cavity. |  floor.  | entrance.|  ground.
-----------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+---------
                 | _Inches._| _Inches._| _Inches._| _Inches._|  _Feet._
Bluebird         |  5 by  5 |        8 |       6  |   1-1/2  |  5 to 10
Robin            |  6 by  8 |        8 |   [1]    |   [1]    |  6 to 15
Chickadee        |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/8  |  6 to 15
Tufted titmouse  |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/4  |  6 to 15
White-breasted   |          |          |          |          |
        nuthatch |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/4  | 12 to 20
House wren       |  4 by  4 |  6 to  8 | 1 to  6  |     7/8  |  6 to 10
Bewick wren      |  4 by  4 |  6 to  8 | 1 to  6  |   1      |  6 to 10
Carolina wren    |  4 by  4 |  6 to  8 | 1 to  6  |   1-1/8  |  6 to 10
Dipper           |  6 by  6 |        6 |       1  |   3      |  1 to  3
Violet-green     |          |          |          |          |
         swallow |  5 by  5 |        6 | 1 to  6  |   1-1/2  | 10 to 15
Tree swallow     |  5 by  5 |        6 | 1 to  6  |   1-1/2  | 10 to 15
Barn swallow     |  6 by  6 |        6 |   [1]    |   [1]    |  8 to 12
Martin           |  6 by  6 |        6 |       1  |   2-1/2  | 15 to 20
Song sparrow     |  6 by  6 |        6 |   [2]    |   [2]    |  1 to  3
House finch      |  6 by  6 |        6 |       4  |   2      |  8 to 12
Phoebe           |  6 by  6 |        6 |   [1]    |   [1]    |  8 to 12
Crested          |          |          |          |          |
      flycatcher |  6 by  6 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   2      |  8 to 20
Flicker          |  7 by  7 | 16 to 18 |      16  |   2-1/2  |  6 to 20
Red-headed       |          |          |          |          |
      woodpecker |  6 by  6 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   2      | 12 to 20
Golden-fronted   |          |          |          |          |
      woodpecker |  6 by  6 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   2      | 12 to 20
Hairy woodpecker |  6 by  6 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   1-1/2  | 12 to 20
Downy woodpecker |  4 by  4 |  8 to 10 |       8  |   1-1/4  |  6 to 20
Screech owl      |  8 by  8 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   3      | 10 to 30
Sparrow hawk     |  8 by  8 | 12 to 15 |      12  |   3      | 10 to 30
Saw-whet owl     |  6 by  6 | 10 to 12 |      10  |   2-1/2  | 12 to 20
Barn owl         | 10 by 18 | 15 to 18 |       4  |   6      | 12 to 18
Wood duck        | 10 by 18 | 10 to 15 |       3  |   6      |  4 to 20
-----------------+----------+----------+----------+----------+---------

[Footnote 1: One or more sides open.]

[Footnote 2: All sides open.]


HOUSES OF SAWED LUMBER.

The boy with an outfit of tools at home, or with a teacher of manual
training interested in birds, can make all of the houses to be
described in this section. Figs. 10 and 11 show simple houses for
wrens and bluebirds. Drawings for this type of house are shown in
Figs. 14, 15 and 21. While the surfaces of lumber used for these
houses may or may not be planed, care must be taken that all pieces
are sawed or planed to the correct sizes with edges and ends square
and true so there will be no bad cracks for drafts and rain to enter.
Be careful to nail the pieces together so that they will not have
occasion to crack or warp. A good way to save time and lumber is to
prepare a piece of stock, getting it of the right thickness, width and
length, and then to saw up this stock on lines carefully laid out as
shown in the drawings of the bluebird and wren houses, flicker nest,
robin shelf and finch house. The most difficult houses to build are
those for martins. In Fig. 45 is given a drawing for a small home
arranged to care for eight families, while the photographs, Figs. 8,
9, 38, 66 and 67 show larger, finer and more difficult houses. The
doors or openings are 2-1/2" in diameter and can be made with an
expansion bit or a key-hole saw. All of these houses are to be made so
they may be cleaned. Sometimes the bottom is hinged on two screws or
nails, and held in proper place by a dowel (bluebird house, Fig. 21);
or screwed in place (wren house, Fig. 21, and martin house, Fig. 45);
or hinged and held in place by a brass spring (wren house, Fig. 14).

[Illustration: FIG. 11. HOUSES FOR WRENS AND BLUEBIRDS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 12. RUSTIC HOUSES.]


RUSTIC HOUSES.

The first group of houses of this type are shown in Figs. 12, 35 and
36. These are made of slabs of wood with the bark left on, and in some
cases, of the bark alone if it can be secured of sufficient thickness.
It is usually a good plan to drive a sufficient number of nails into
the bark to keep it in place, otherwise it will drop off. Houses such
as these attract birds that would avoid a freshly painted imitation of
some large residence or public building. Figs. 20 and 37 show houses
made of a section of a tree split or sawed in halves, the nest cavity
hollowed out, and then fastened together again with screws. The top
should be covered with a board or piece of tin to keep out rain. The
third division of this type of house is made of sawed lumber and then
trimmed with bark or twigs. In this way the same frames may be made to
appear as very different bird houses when completed. Such houses are
shown in Figs. 30 to 34. Sometimes a pail is used for the frame and
then covered with bark, as the center house of Fig. 28. This house has
a partition placed half-way up making it a two family apartment, and
is provided with ventilating and cleaning devices.


CEMENT AND STUCCO HOUSES.

Houses may be cast of concrete as Fig. 39. This requires a mold or
form, and takes considerable planning to insure success. A form is
made whose inside dimensions are those of the outside of the bird
house, and of the desired shape. A second form, or core, to be placed
inside of the first form, is made as large as the inside of the bird
house. The two forms must be mounted so they will remain in the right
relation while concrete is placed in the space between them. After
this has set, the forms may be removed, cleaned and used again. The
roof is generally made separately and put in position last. Or the
roof can be cast as a part of the house in which case the bottom is
inserted last. Birds do not take as kindly to this type of house as a
rule, as to those made of wood.

[Illustration: FIG. 13. STUCCO HOUSE FOR MARTINS.]

The stucco house has many possibilities. Fig. 38, shows a group of
such houses designed to match the general appearance of garages in
good residence districts. The frame is made of wood and the stucco
applied by one of the methods in use on large houses. Seventh grade
boys have made such houses, using 3/8" material for the frames,
tacking on wire netting and then plastering each side of the house in
turn with concrete. The sides were given a pebble-dash surface, while
the roof was finished with a steel trowel to give a smooth surface
that will shed water readily, Fig. 13.

[Illustration: FIG. 14. (WREN HOUSE)]

[Illustration: FIG. 15. (WREN HOUSE)]

A CAREFULLY PLANNED PROJECT IS SHOWN IN VARIOUS STAGES OF COMPLETION
IN FIGS. 15-19.

[Illustration: FIG. 16. WREN HOUSE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 17. ECONOMY OF TIME AND MATERIAL WHEN LAID OUT IN
THIS MANNER.]

[Illustration: FIG. 18. ASSEMBLING BIRD HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 19. FINISHING BIRD HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 20. (FLICKER HOUSE MOUNTED ON POST OR TREE), (HOME
FOR WOODPECKERS), (OUTDOOR NEST SHELF FOR BARN SWALLOWS, PHOEBES AND
ROBINS)]

[Illustration: FIG. 21. (BLUEBIRD HOUSE), (WREN HOUSE), (WOODPECKER
HOUSE)]

[Illustration: FIG. 22. HOUSES BUILT BY STUDENTS AT ST. JOHNSBURY,
VT.]

[Illustration: FIG. 23. (CHICKADEE HOUSE)]

[Illustration: FIG. 24. WREN, BLUE BIRD AND ROBIN HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 25. (FLICKER OR WOODPECKER HOUSE)]

[Illustration: FIG. 26. (WREN BOX)]

[Illustration: FIG. 27. (FLYCATCHER HOME)]

[Illustration: FIG. 28. RUSTIC HOUSES MADE BY ST. PAUL, MINN. BOYS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 29. RUSTIC HOUSES MADE BY PITTSBURGH, PA. BOYS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 30. SIMPLE LOG AND BIRCHBARK CONSTRUCTION, HOUSES
FOR WRENS, BLUEBIRDS, ETC.]

[Illustration: FIG. 31. BIRCH BARK HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 32. GOOD TYPES OF SMALL HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 33. GOOD TYPES OF SMALL HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 34. A QUAINT BIRD HOME.]

[Illustration: FIG. 35. A HOUSE OF CEDAR SLABS FOR JENNY WREN.]

[Illustration: FIG. 36. MAKING BIRD HOUSES TO ORDER.]

[Illustration: FIG. 37. CONSTRUCTION OF A WOODPECKER'S HOME. A MARTIN,
OR TREE SWALLOW HOME.]

[Illustration: FIG. 38. STUCCO HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 39. CONCRETE HOUSES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 40. READY TO PLACE FINISHED HOUSES.]




PLACING HOUSES.


The table given on page 16 states the height from the ground that
different species of birds seem to prefer for their nests, to which
several suggestions may be added. The houses should be so located that
cats and other bird enemies do not have easy access to them. The
openings ought to be turned away from the directions from which storms
and winds most often come; and the house must hang or tilt so rain
does not run in at the entrance. Such birds as the woodpeckers spend
most of their time in the trees and so do not take as readily to a
house set on a pole out in the open as martins or bluebirds. Flickers
are seen on the ground a good share of the time in search of their
favorite food, and so will frequently live in houses nailed to fence
posts. Houses are more apt to be occupied if placed in position in
fall or winter before the spring migration, especially houses made of
freshly dressed or newly painted wood. However, such birds as the
robin and bluebird rear more than one brood each season and so a house
set up in May or June may have a tenant. Figs. 40 to 44 show boys of
the University of Wisconsin High School placing some of the houses
they had made.

[Illustration: FIG. 41. (PLACING HOUSES)]

[Illustration: FIG. 42. (PLACING HOUSES)]

[Illustration: FIG. 43. (PLACING HOUSES)]

[Illustration: FIG. 44. (PLACING HOUSES)]




FEEDING SHELVES AND SHELTERS.


Nesting boxes make their appeal to but a part of the birds of any
community. These attract during the early spring and summer months.
Many other species are worth having in our orchards and gardens for
their songs and their activity in destroying insects and weed seeds.
To these some other attraction than nesting boxes must be offered.
Then again, many birds would spend a longer time with us if a certain
food supply were assured them. A simple suet feeder is shown in Fig.
45. The birds cling to the chicken wire while eating. A feeding box
for seed-eating birds is given in Fig. 46. Fig. 47 gives a shelf to be
nailed to the sunny side of a building, while Fig. 48 shows a somewhat
similar type to be fastened to a window sill, making it possible to
observe the birds that come to dine. Birds that hesitate to come close
to buildings may be attracted by the feeders set out in the open. Fig.
50 shows a feeder mounted on an iron pipe so it can be turned in any
direction. This feeder has one end closed by a pane of glass, and is
to be turned so that prevailing winds do not enter. Fig. 49 shows a
feeding shelf for winter use which makes an acceptable robin nesting
shelf in spring. In Fig. 53 is given a feeder mounted on a base with a
vane so the adjustment takes place automatically. Figs. 51 and 52 show
two food shelters considerably more difficult to construct. They have
glass on all sides, and are open at the bottom so that birds can enter
or leave at will. Fig. 30 shows a simple food shelter offering some
protection against rain and snow, while a very attractive group of
shelters are given in Figs. 54, 55, 56 and 57. If you look closely you
may see "Mabel" in the right hand feeder in Fig. 54. The builder of
these shelters found her so positive about her rights--since she
discovered the food supply--that he has been obliged to put up the
others to keep peace.

[Illustration: FIG. 45. (MARTIN HOUSE), (SUET FEEDER)]

[Illustration: FIG. 46. (NESTING BOX FOR BLUEBIRDS), (FEEDING BOX)]

[Illustration: FIG. 47. (FEEDING SHELF)]

[Illustration: FIG. 48. (WINDOW FOOD SHELTER)]

[Illustration: FIG. 49. ROBIN SHELF OR FEEDING SHELF.]

[Illustration: FIG. 50. HILBERSDORFER FOOD HOUSE.]

[Illustration: FIG. 51. (HOUSE FOR HOUSE FINCHES), (FOOD SHELTER
HOUSE)]

[Illustration: FIG. 52. (SHELTERED FOOD HOUSE)]

[Illustration: FIG. 53. (ADJUSTABLE FOOD SHELTER)]

[Illustration: FIG. 54. (FOOD SHELTERS)]

[Illustration: FIG. 55. WHEN THE SHELTER IS MOST NEEDED.]

[Illustration: FIG. 56. BIRDS SHOULD FIND THESE FOOD SHELTERS BEFORE
BAD WEATHER COMES.]

[Illustration: FIG. 57. A "JAPANESE" EFFECT.]

The window-sill lunch counter shown in Figs. 58 and 61 is a most
effective way to study birds at close range. The window selected for
this purpose should be on a quiet and sheltered side of the house if
possible. If trees and shrubbery are near at hand birds are more
likely to be attracted. Branches of thorn apples, alders and
evergreens are fastened firmly to the window frames to dress the lunch
counter on the outside while house plants or at least a curtain
should be placed on the inside as a screen. Fig. 59 shows how
particular varieties of birds may be attracted by offering favorite
foods while Fig. 60 gives an idea of what kindness will do.

[Illustration: FIG. 58. THE BIRD WINDOW SEEN FROM INSIDE THE ROOM.]

[Illustration: FIG. 59. BLUEBIRDS ATTRACTED TO THE WINDOW SILL BY MEAL
WORMS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 60. A ROBIN ABOUT TO EAT FROM THE CHILDREN'S
HANDS.]

[Illustration: FIG. 61. THE WINDOW-SILL LUNCH COUNTER FROM OUTSIDE.]


FOODS.

Food shelters become centers of interest in proportion to the number
of birds attracted to them. The kind of food placed there determines
in time the kind of birds that will be found frequenting them.
Seed-eating birds are readily attracted by the use of small grains
such as oats and wheat. However, every farmer finds a quantity of
weed seeds upon cleaning his seed grain, which proves very acceptable
to chickadees and blue jays. Bread crusts or crumbs, crackers and
doughnuts may be placed in the food shelter with the knowledge that
the birds will eat them. For those of the city who would need to buy
seeds, it will be just as well to get hemp, millet, canary seed and
sunflower seed, together with the small grains and cracked corn for
foods. Suet, scraps of meat and various vegetable scraps, such as
celery, lettuce, apples, raisins, and the berries of various bushes,
if they can be obtained, are relished. Bluebirds seem fond of meal
worms such as develop in old cereals. All birds require water and
frequently suffer because this is not to be had. If it is possible to
meet this need a great service is rendered. Finally, when the ground
is snow covered, many birds appreciate a supply of sand and finely
ground poultry grit. Many birds are lost each winter because of
insufficient food during inclement weather, that if cared for would
remain near neighbors in the summer to wage war upon insect pests.




BIRD BATHS.


The best bird baths have to meet two requirements: (a) clean, fresh
water, and (b) safety from enemies. Almost any shallow dish will meet
both requirements if properly placed and cared for.

[Illustration: FIG. 62. THE PALM GARDEN EXHIBIT OF BIRD BATHS, ETC.,
ST. PAUL, MINN.]

[Illustration: FIG. 63. (CONCRETE BIRD BATH)]

Fig. 62 shows several baths made of concrete. The pedestal and basin
are made of two separate pieces, and are cast in a form or mold. A
more difficult concrete bath is shown in Fig. 63. This project is made
in four pieces. The base consists of two parts, the bottom being cast
in a form made of 1/2" or 7/8" stock. The upper part is "swept up" by
means of the templet shown, which revolves about an iron rod or a
dowel-rod firmly fastened above, and held below in a hole bored in a
temporary base of wood. The column is cast in a mold made of sheet tin
or galvanized iron run thru tinners' rolls, and held by means of
several wires twisted about it. When this is being cast two pieces of
iron rod are inserted as shown which are to pass into both bowl and
base to make the whole job firm. The bowl may be swept by either of
two methods. The first consists of the making of two templets. With
the first templet a core of clay is swept up of the desired depth and
diameter. Then concrete is placed over this core, which has previously
been treated to a coat of oil. Woven wire is cut into a circular shape
and bent to approximate the curve of the bowl. More concrete is placed
over this, and swept up by means of the second templet. Some
difficulty will be experienced in removing the templet if undercut as
much as shown; however, the mark where it was taken off can easily
be troweled smooth again. The finished pieces are now assembled with a
small quantity of "neat" cement in each joint. The second method for
making the bowl begins with the making of templets cut on the opposite
side of the outline, as compared with the first method. A box is then
nailed up and a clay or plaster-of-paris base made. This is oiled, and
the concrete put in place. In this case a wetter mixture than in the
first case should be used. The second templet is then used to strike
off the inside of the bowl. After this has set the pieces may be
assembled as before.




BIRD ENEMIES.


One sometimes wonders that birds manage to exist and to actually
increase in numbers. Possibly the first group of enemies should
include men and boys who kill adult birds, leaving the fledglings to
starve, or who rob the nests of eggs. It is the writer's belief that
every boy who makes one or more of the projects in this booklet, and
sees it occupied, will become one of a growing number who will care
for instead of destroy the birds of his neighborhood. Further, if
every man who now thoughtlessly or willfully destroys birds, knew the
real money value of the work birds do, he would build or buy houses
and food shelters to increase Nature's best friends to mankind.

The second group of enemies include ants and other vermin which at
times infest nests and nesting boxes, snakes, squirrels, mice and
rats. Protection against this group is afforded by bands of tin about
the pole, or spikes of wood or metal pointing downward so that access
is impossible by climbing up the pole. Another protection is to make
the entrance holes small enough to admit only the occupant for whom
the house was intended. Of course, the houses for the larger birds
must be protected in other ways. Charles Tesch of Milwaukee suggests a
sticky fly paper compound made of resin (melted) and castor oil as a
preventive for the inroads of the small red ant, if suitable support
is available.

The final group consists of the two worst foes of bird life, cats and
English or house sparrows. If you really value the birds that have
been reared in the house you have built you may need to get up _early_
more than one morning when the youngsters leave the nest to protect
them from the highly respectable (?) tabby that lives possibly next
door if not at your own house. It often comes to a choice between cats
and birds: and the cats may be disposed of in two ways--the right kind
of box traps for the homeless and unknown robbers, and an air rifle
with sufficient "sting" for the trespasser from next door. A few
lessons of this kind usually have some effect.

The English or house sparrow was introduced into this country about a
half-century ago. It has spread over practically all of the United
States and Southern Canada. Possibly no bird has exhibited such powers
of adapting itself to new conditions. The sparrow is no respecter of
places for locating its nest. It lives on a variety of foods changing
from one to another as the necessity arises. In spite of opposition,
this bird is constantly on the increase, so much so that in many cases
more desirable native birds have been obliged to leave. The sparrow is
filthy and quarrelsome, and lives mainly upon valuable small grains in
every case where this is possible. There are two methods possible
which afford partial relief: (1) traps and (2) driving them away with
an air-rifle. Traps are usually successful for a comparatively brief
time, since the sparrows soon associate the trap with danger and so
avoid it. A very successful type of woven wire trap is advocated by
the Department of Agriculture but is probably beyond the ability of
the average boy to make well. It sells by commercial manufacturers of
bird supplies for about $4.00. This trap works all the year around as
it depends upon the attraction of food. Fig. 65 gives a simple, yet
effective trap. However, it requires the presence of some hidden
observer to spring it at the right moment. Another type of trap is
based upon the nest-house idea. Its effectiveness is limited largely
to the nesting season, though it may be used by the birds for shelter.
One of the most efficient traps was invented by Charles Tesch, of
Milwaukee, Wis. Its principle is that of a tipping chamber leading
into a sack thru a chute. Fig. 64 gives the dimensions to be followed
in making such a trap. The inventor says that the bag should be far
enough away from the box to make certain that the victim has no chance
to tell the others what happened to him by chirping, otherwise they
will no longer enter the trap. The box must be perfectly tight in
order to prevent drafts from issuing thru the entrance which will
cause sparrows to keep away. If a few feathers are glued or shellacked
to the tipping chamber floor, the sparrow is often attracted more
strongly. The bag should be examined frequently to liberate bluebirds
and wrens, who may have been caught.

[Illustration: FIG. 64. (SPARROW TRAP)]

[Illustration: FIG. 65. (SPARROW TRAP)]

However, fighting bird enemies without the cooperation of neighbors is
not an easy matter. In the case of sparrows, so many more are left
that traps alone are ineffective. An airgun properly used offers some
help in the city to drive them away from the premises, while a shot
gun or 22 caliber rifle are more effective in the country. If every
sparrow nest were torn down and no place given them in your
neighborhood, the pest is likely to avoid your grounds. Finally, keep
nesting boxes free from sparrows while the owners are away for the
winter.




BIRD HOUSE EXHIBITIONS.


Many cities are beginning to do excellent work along the lines of bird
preservation and attraction. This usually leads into an exhibition or
contest, though many times quantities of houses are made and sold for
other purposes, such as raising money for athletic suits for the
school teams.

At Cleveland, Ohio, a large number of houses such as are shown in
Figs. 15-19 were made for the city Bird Lovers' Association to be
placed in the city parks. The boys received the profits of the sale
after materials were paid for. In the Mercer Center, Seattle, Wash.,
the boys wanted suits for the "team." Bird houses were made in dozen
lots for a large department store, and soon the boys had all the money
the suits cost. Fig. 36 shows a group of 7th grade boys with the
houses made in two class periods of two hours each. At St. Paul,
Minn., the annual exhibit has become a larger affair than the
automobile show. This year it will be held in the city auditorium
which seats 10,000 people. The city council will pay the rent of this
building for a week and the boys will see that it is filled with bird
houses. Up to date (March 11, 1916) over $1,000 worth of orders have
been taken for houses to be delivered after the exhibition. Fig. 62
shows the palm room at the St. Paul exhibit in 1915. The county making
the most bird houses in 1915, so far as has been reported, was
Allegheny County, Pa., where approximately 15,000 houses were
produced. Fig. 67 shows the prize winners in a department store
contest at Pittsburgh, Pa., while an exhibit in the same city is shown
in Fig. 66.

[Illustration: FIG. 66. THE PITTSBURGH EXHIBIT.]

[Illustration: FIG. 67. PRIZEWINNERS IN DEPARTMENT STORE CONTEST.]

Space will not permit giving extended rules for such contests since
the rules must vary with each city. Briefly, there should be provision
made to give all competitors an equal chance. Boys of the 6th grade
should meet others of that grade. Prizes may be awarded for the best
houses made for the more common birds, such as wrens, bluebirds, and
martins. These should be judged as to adaptability or fitness to
purpose, amount of protection afforded to birds, good workmanship and
artistic merit. A prize might be awarded to the boy whose house has
the first pair of birds nesting in it. Prizes may be of many kinds,
but tools and books, as well as cash prizes are often given by local
business men.




WHERE MORE INFORMATION MAY BE OBTAINED.


U. S. Dept. of Agriculture, Division of Publications: Bird Houses and
How to Build Them, Bulletin No. 609; Fifty Common Birds, Bulletin No.
513 (15 cents); The English Sparrow as a Pest, Bulletin No. 493.

Magazines which have published articles on birds and bird houses: Bird
Lore; Country Life; The Craftsman; Elementary School Teacher; Ladies'
Home Journal; Manual Training and Vocational Education; Outing;
Outlook; School Arts Magazine; Something To Do; The Farm Journal; The
National Geographic Magazine; Youths Companion.

National Association of Audubon Societies: Leaflets, photographs,
advice.

Liberty Bell Bird Club of The Farm Journal, Philadelphia, Pa.:
Leaflets, books, pictures, supplies, inspiration.

Public Library: Reed, "Bird Guide"; Blackburn, "Problems in Farm
Woodwork"; Chapman, "Bird Life"; Hiesemann, "How to Attract Wild
Birds"; National Geographic Society, "Common Birds of Town and
Country"; Trafton, "Methods of Attracting Birds."

Catalogs of Bird House Companies: Audubon Bird House Co., Meriden, New
Hampshire; "Bird Architecture" Crescent Co., Toms River, N. J. (20
cents); Joseph H. Dodson, 728 Security Bldg., Chicago, Ill.; "Bird
Houses Large and Small," Mathews Mfg. Co., Cleveland, Ohio; Charles E.
White, Box 45B, Kenilworth, Ill.; The Wheatley Pottery, 2429 Reading
Road, Cincinnati, Ohio.




INDEX

(Numbers refer to pages)


A

Adjustable food shelters, 41, 44

Ants, 51

Audubon Association, 57


B

Bibliography, 57

Birchbark houses, 30, 32

Bird Architecture, 57

Bird baths, 48, 49, 50

Bird enemies, 51

Bird Houses and How to Build Them, 57

Bird house exhibitions, 54

Bird Houses Large and Small, 57

Bird house manufacturers, 57

Birds that live in nesting boxes, 7

Bluebirds, 7, 46

Bluebird houses, 17, 25, 26, 27, 30, 39

Books about birds, 57


C

Cats, 51

Cement and stucco houses, 19, 34, 35

Chickadee, 9

Chickadee houses, 18, 26

Construction of bird houses, 15

Construction of Woodpecker's home, 24, 34

Contests, 56

Contributors, 3, 4


D

Dimensions of nesting boxes, 16

Downy Woodpecker, 12


E

Enemies of birds, 51

English Sparrows, 52

Exhibitions of bird houses, 54


F

Feeding shelves and shelters, 37, 42, 43, 44, 45

Feeding box for seed eating birds, 39

Feeding shelf for side of building, 40

Finch, 10

Flicker, 11, 12

Flicker homes, 24, 27

Flycatcher home, 29

Foods, 46


H

Hilbersdorfer feeder, 41

House Finch, 10

Houses covered with bark or twigs, 30, 31, 32, 33

Houses for Bluebirds, 17, 25, 26, 27, 39

Houses for Chickadees, 18, 26

House for Finches, 42

Houses for Flickers, 24, 27

House for Flycatchers, 29

Houses for Martins, 13, 14, 38

Houses for Robins, 24, 27

Houses for Woodpeckers, 24, 25

Houses for Wrens, 10, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 25, 27, 28, 30

Houses of sawed lumber, 16

Houses of slabs, 33


L

Log houses, 28, 29, 30


M

Magazines which have published bird articles, 57

Martins, 13

Martin houses, 13, 14, 38


N

Nuthatch feeding on sunflower seeds, 12


O

Opening for various bird houses, 16


P

Pointing houses, 15

Palm garden exhibit of bird baths, 49

Pittsburgh, Pa. exhibit, 55

Placing houses, 35, 36, 37

Protection against enemies, 51


R

Robin, 8, 46

Robin shelves, 24, 27, 41

Rules for bird house contests, 56

Rustic houses, 18, 28, 29


S

Seed feeder, 39

Shelters, bird house, 37, 42, 43, 44, 45

Sizes of entrances and houses, 16

Sparrows, 52

Sparrow traps, 53, 54

Stucco houses, 19, 34

Suet feeder, 38


T

Table of dimensions of houses, 16

Time for placing houses, 37

Traps for sparrows, 53, 54


V

Vermin, 40


W

Wall feeding shelf, 40

Window feeding shelf, 40

Window sill lunch counter, 45, 46, 47

Woodpeckers, 11, 12

Woodpecker houses, 24, 25

Wood suitable for making houses, 15

Wrens, 10, 11

Wren houses, 10, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 25, 27, 28




MANUAL TRAINING TOYS

FOR

THE BOY'S WORKSHOP

By HARRIS W. MOORE
Supervisor of Manual Training, Watertown, Mass.


A COLLECTION OF FORTY-TWO PROJECTS
OVERFLOWING WITH "BOY" INTEREST


A popular boys' book that is truly educational. The projects are all
new in the manual training shop. The text gives instructions for
making each project and treats of tools and tool processes. The
following is a partial list--

Windmills
Kites
Water Wheels
Water Motors
Pumps
Boat
Pile Driver
Kite String Reel
Cannon
Darts
Buzzers
Tops
Guns
Whistles
Bow and Arrows
Swords
Boxes
Telephone

THIRTY-FIVE FULL-PAGE PLATES OF WORKING DRAWINGS

PRICE, POSTPAID, $1.15

       *       *       *       *       *

KITECRAFT
AND KITE TOURNAMENTS

By CHARLES M. MILLER
Assistant Supervisor of Manual Training
Los Angeles, California

KITES--AEROPLANES--TOURNAMENTS

A comprehensive and reliable treatment of kites and kite flying. Mr.
Miller, the author of the book, for a number of years past, has made a
wonderful success of kite flying in the schools of Los Angeles,
California. The book deals with general kite construction, tells how
to make all kinds of kites and how to fly them. Describes kite
accessories and how to decorate kites. It also describes the
construction and use of moving devices, messengers, suspended figures
and appliances, balloons and parachutes.

Four chapters treat of aeroplanes, gliders and model aeroplanes,
together with one on propellers, motors, gears and winding devices.

The book contains over 267 illustrations, photographs, drawings, and
diagrams.

PRICE, POSTPAID, $1.50

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MANUAL ARTS PRESS, PEORIA, ILLINOIS




CHOICE BOOKS FOR BOYS

       *       *       *       *       *

FOR HOME AND SCHOOL LIBRARIES


DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION IN WOOD.

=BY WILLIAM NOYES.= A book full of charm and distinction and the first
to give due consideration to the esthetic side of woodworking. It is
intended to give to beginners practice in designing simple projects in
wood and an opportunity to acquire skill in handling tools. The book
illustrates a series of projects and gives suggestions for other
similar projects together with information regarding tools and
processes for making. A pleasing volume abundantly and beautifully
illustrated. Price, $1.75.


HANDWORK IN WOOD.

=BY WILLIAM NOYES.= A handbook for teachers and a textbook for normal
school and college students. The best reference book available for
teachers of woodworking. A comprehensive and scholarly treatise,
covering logging, saw-milling, seasoning and measuring, hand tools,
wood fastenings, equipment and care of the shop, the common joints,
types of wood structures, principles of joinery, and wood finishing.
Price, $2.25.


WOOD AND FOREST.

=BY WILLIAM NOYES.= Treats of wood, distribution of American forests,
life of the forest, enemies of the forest, destruction, conservation
and uses of the forest, with a key to the common woods by Filibert
Roth. Describes 67 principal species of wood with maps of the habitat,
leaf drawings, life size photographs and microphotographs of sections.
Contains a general bibliography of books and articles on wood and
forest. Profusely illustrated with photographs from the United States
forest service and with pen and ink drawings by Anna Gausmann Noyes
and photographs by the author. Price, $3.50.


ESSENTIALS OF WOODWORKING.

=BY IRA S. GRIFFITH.= A clear and comprehensive treatment of
woodworking tools, materials, and processes. It is illustrated with
photographs and numerous pen drawings. The standard textbook for
students beginning woodworking. Price, 75 cents.


ART METALWORK.

=BY ARTHUR F. PAYNE.= A textbook written by an expert craftsman and
experienced teacher. It treats of the various materials and their
production, ores, alloys, commercial forms, etc.; of tools and
equipments suitable for the work; the inexpensive equipment of the
practical craftsman; and of the correlation of art metalwork with
design and other school subjects. It describes in detail all the
processes involved in making articles ranging from a watch fob to a
silver loving-cup. It is abundantly and beautifully illustrated,
showing work done by students under ordinary school conditions in a
manual training shop. The standard book on the subject. Price, $2.00.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MANUAL ARTS PRESS, PEORIA, ILLINOIS




CHOICE BOOKS FOR BOYS

THE "PROBLEMS SERIES" FOR EITHER HOME OR SCHOOL USE


PROBLEMS IN FARM WOODWORK.

=BY SAMUEL A. BLACKBURN.= A book of working drawings of 100 practical
problems relating to agriculture and farm life. There are 60 full-page
plates of working drawings, each accompanied by a page or more of text
treating of "Purpose," "Material," "Bill of Stock," "Tools,"
"Directions" and "Assembly." A wonderfully practical book. Price,
$1.25.


PROJECTS FOR BEGINNING WOODWORK AND MECHANICAL DRAWING.

=BY IRA S. GRIFFITH.= Consists of working drawings and working
directions. The projects are such as have proved of exceptional
service where woodworking and mechanical drawing are taught in a
thoro, systematic manner in the seventh and eighth grades. The 50
projects in the book have been selected and organized with the
constant aim of securing the highest educational results. Price,
$1.00.


PROBLEMS IN WOODWORKING.

=BY M. W. MURRAY.= A convenient collection of good problems consisting
of 40 plates of working drawings of problems in bench work that have
been successfully worked out by boys in grades seven to nine,
inclusive. Price 75 cents.


PROBLEMS IN FURNITURE MAKING.

=BY FRED D. CRAWSHAW.= Contains 43 full-page working drawings of
articles of furniture. Every piece shown is appropriate and
serviceable in the home. In addition to the working drawings, there is
a perspective sketch of each article completed. There 36 pages of text
giving notes on the construction of each project, chapters on the
"Design," and "Construction" of furniture, and one on "Finishes."
Price, $1.00.


FURNITURE MAKING--ADVANCED PROJECTS IN WOODWORK.

=BY IRA S. GRIFFITH.= Consists of 50 plates of problems and
accompanying notes. It is essentially a collection of problems in
furniture making, selected and designed with reference to school use.
On the plate with each working drawing is a good perspective sketch of
the completed object. In draftsmanship and refinement of design these
problems are of superior quality. It is in every respect an excellent
collection. Price, 95 cents.


PROBLEMS IN WOOD-TURNING.

=BY FRED D. CRAWSHAW.= A textbook on the science and art of
wood-turning. Contains 25 full-page plates of working drawings
covering spindle, face-plate, and chuck turning. It is a clear,
practical and suggestive book on wood-turning, and a valuable textbook
for students' use. Price, 50 cents.


PROBLEMS IN MECHANICAL DRAWING.

=BY CHARLES A. BENNETT.= With drawings made by Fred D. Crawshaw. A
students' textbook consisting of 80 plates classified into groups
according to principle and arranged according to difficulty of
solution. Price, 75 cents.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MANUAL ARTS PRESS, PEORIA, ILLINOIS

       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes

Index has been added to the Table of Contents.

Some illustrations have been moved to paragraph breaks to prevent the
breakup of text. Page references match the original book. Descriptive
titles in parentheses have been added to images which originally had
only a Fig. number for a caption.

Page 13: FIG. 8. A MARTIN COLONYS was changed to A MARTIN COLONY.

Page 14: The two occurrences of Pere Gynt were changed to Peer Gynt.

Page 15: thoroly was changed to thoroughly.

Page 51: oposite was changed to opposite.

Page 54, now Page 52: shellaced was changed to shellacked.

Templet(s) used 7 times; retained.

Thru, used 3 times; retained.

Page 63: thoro; retained.

Bold text is indicated with the = symbol.








End of Project Gutenberg's Bird Houses Boys Can Build, by Albert F. Siepert

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRD HOUSES BOYS CAN BUILD ***

***** This file should be named 25990.txt or 25990.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/9/25990/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Diane Monico, and
The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
